My Essay Question will be: 
Does playing Violent Video Games increase the likelihood that someone will behave in a violent or aggressive manner?

I will be using the following papers as references to answer this question.

1:  Brand Memory, Attitude, and State Aggression in Violent Games: Focused on the Roles of Arousal, Negative Affect, and Spatial Presence

Abstract:
Violent games have increasingly gained their market share in recent video game markets. They have attracted much attention due to their potential effects on users in advertising and aggression. However, little research has investigated such effects considering both user aggression and persuasion mechanism in virtual space. Based on the general aggression model and the presence theory, the current study examines the effects of realistic violence cues (blood and screams) and trait aggression on brand memory, attitude change toward brands in the game, and state aggression through physiological arousal (i.e., Skin conductance level), negative affect and spatial presence. Results show that violence cues affect both arousal and negative affect, and in turn the negative affect changes attitude toward brands negatively and increases the degree of state aggression. Trait aggression enhances presence, and the spatial presence strongly affects brand memory. Results and implications are discussed.
Published in: System Sciences (HICSS), 2015 48th Hawaii International Conference on
Date of Conference: 5-8 Jan. 2015
Date Added to IEEE Xplore: 30 March 2015
Electronic ISBN: 978-1-4799-7367-5
Print ISSN: 1530-1605
 
INSPEC Accession Number: 15025180
DOI: 10.1109/HICSS.2015.426
Publisher: IEEE
Conference Location: Kauai, HI, USA

2:  Computer games and ethical issues

Abstract:
Summary form only given. Computer games have been exploited in educational procedures, since they help in fostering creativity, in familiarization with technology, and develop problem-solving, logical thinking, communication, and collaborative skills (Sicart 2009). Games is a symptom of our societies and offer learning and strong educational advantages, as they fully motivate and engage students. The term “game” refers to a wide range of activities but, researchers (Juul, 2003, Crawford, 2003) stated that it is difficult to define in terms of necessary and sufficient features. Moreover Grendler (1996, pp. 523) defines games as “consisting of rules that describe allowable player moves, game constraints and privileges (such as ways of earning extra turns) and penalties for illegal (non permissible) actions. Further the rules may be imaginative in that they need not relate to real world-events.” According to Deterding, Sicart, Nacke, O'Hara and Dixon (2011), gamification “is an informal umbrella term for the use of video game elements in non-gaming systems to improve user experience (UX) and user engagement”. Thus, game designers intent to identify and create non-game contexts, products, like points into the game, affecting the players' attitudes and ideas. According to Dang et al. (2007) new video games are ethically affecting people who play them. Additionally, the ethical issues include: violence, rating, education, stereotyping against women, community and addiction. Since computer games usage is increasingly spreading, concern must be placed on the ethical issues that are built in them. There are many games involving violent acts as well as other content related to violence. Thus, many people may believe that playing these types of video games can cause a person to be more violent (Dang et al., 2007). From the education perspective, gaming can be used to teach different things, some positive while others are negative. Educational system must play important role in the ethical improvement of game culture. Responsible game developers need to be informed and take under consideration the research findings concerning the effects of the medium they utilize. Also, game designers and developers need to make knowledgeable decisions for the game content, purpose and goals (Dodig-Crnkovic and Larsson, 2005). Another idea is to design games whose specific goal is to teach ethical principles.
Published in: Interactive Mobile Communication Technologies and Learning (IMCL), 2014 International Conference on
Date of Conference: 13-14 Nov. 2014
Date Added to IEEE Xplore: 19 January 2015
 ISBN Information:
 
INSPEC Accession Number: 14865381
DOI: 10.1109/IMCTL.2014.7011160
Publisher: IEEE
Conference Location: Thessaloniki, Greece

3:  The Causes and Consequences of Presence: Considering the Influence of Violent Video Games on Presence and Aggression

Abstract:
The level of presence is likely to influence the effect of media violence. This project examines the causes and consequences of presence in the context of violent video game play. In a between subjects design, 227 participants were randomly assigned to play either a violent or a nonviolent video game. The results are consistent with what would be predicted by social learning theory and are consistent with previous presence research. Causal modeling analyses reveal two separate paths to presence: from individual differences and condition. The first path reveals that individual differences (previous game use and gender) predict presence. Those who frequently play video games reported higher levels of presence than those who play video games less frequently. Males play more games but felt less presence than women. The second path is related to perceived violence: those who perceived the game to be more violent felt more presence than those who perceived less violence in the game. Both of these paths were influenced by frustration with the game, which reduced presence. Those who felt more presence felt more hostility and were more verbally aggressive than those who felt lower levels of presence. Higher levels of presence led to increased physically aggressive intentions. Theoretical and practical implications are discussed.
Published in: Presence ( Volume: 17, Issue: 3, June 1 2008 )
Page(s): 256 - 268
Date of Publication: June 1 2008 
Print ISSN: 1054-7460
 
DOI: 10.1162/pres.17.3.256
Publisher: MITP

4:  Violent Components and Interactive Mode of Computer Video Game on Player's Negative Social Effect

Abstract:
According to prior studies, aggressive behavior and some other anti-social personality maybe originate from home environment, peer pressure, video game. Violent video game as one part of a violent culture that many children and adults inhabit, it plays more important role in today society. The social effect of violent video game has been discussed by many scientists concerning the juvenile violence. This article briefly reviews the studies of violent video game on players’ negative effect in their personality development, such as aggression, anti-social emotion and action, and so on. Even violent video game is not the only way that contributing to people’s negative behavior. One consistent conclusion can be concluded that violent video game increase players’ aggressive behaviors, aggressive cognitions, psychological arousal, hostility and other negative reactions. However, it's not so much Frustrating. Playing game have positive effects on player, either, and if we use it in a correct way, it may be a suitable way to develop our basic cognitive processing, thinking and problem-solving skills.
Published in: Intelligent Information Technology Application, 2009. IITA 2009. Third International Symposium on
Date of Conference: 21-22 Nov. 2009
Date Added to IEEE Xplore: 31 December 2009
Print ISBN: 978-0-7695-3859-4
 
INSPEC Accession Number: 11051794
DOI: 10.1109/IITA.2009.500
Publisher: IEEE
Conference Location: Shanghai, China

5:  Our Virtual Selves, Our Virtual Morals: Mass Effect Players' Personality and In-Game Choices

Abstract:
While many studies have been done on the consequences of playing aggressive games, there is little research on games where players can make choices that affect the storyline and the level of violence they employ. This online study focused on the Mass Effects series, which offers players' choices in how the story progresses, and positions them on Paragon (peaceful, 'rule adherence') or Renegade (aggressive, 'end justifies the means') alignment scale. We recruited 1007 players (69% women, 19% men, mean age=22, SD=5 years), and investigated how their choice to align with Paragon or Renegade positions was related to their Big Five personality traits, and to their decisions in two 'trolley' dilemmas. It was found that Renegade players scored significantly less on Agreeableness (mean 2.94 points) than Mixed players (mean 3.22) and Paragon players (mean 3.35). In the first trolley task (pulling a lever and thus killing one person to save five) there was no significant association between the playstyle and the decision made, with the majority of players electing to pull the lever. However, there was a significant group effect in the second trolley scenario (pushing a bystander onto the tracks to save five other lives), where the Renegade players were more likely to act (54%) than Mixed (40%) or Paragon players (30%).
Published in: Interactive Technologies and Games (iTAG), 2016 International Conference on
Date of Conference: 26-27 Oct. 2016
Date Added to IEEE Xplore: 15 December 2016
 ISBN Information:
 
INSPEC Accession Number: 16554594
DOI: 10.1109/iTAG.2016.20
Publisher: IEEE
Conference Location: Nottingham, UK

6:  Preschoolers' cognitive game prototype

Abstract:
Preschoolers as digital native cannot avoid gadgets. Game applications are more accessible to them. People believe that games have a negative impact such as bad character and violence. Nevertheless, the game can be developed into a fun tool. This research aimed to design a game prototype boosting cognitive abilities for preschoolers. Prototyping and testing the game system were the method. A preschoolers' cognitive game prototype was this research outcome. Game components, interfaces, and black-box testing would be discussed in this paper.
Published in: Applied System Innovation (ICASI), 2017 International Conference on
Date of Conference: 13-17 May 2017
Date Added to IEEE Xplore: 24 July 2017
 ISBN Information:
 
INSPEC Accession Number: 17059137
DOI: 10.1109/ICASI.2017.7988313
Publisher: IEEE
Conference Location: Sapporo, Japan

7:  Examining the relationship between game type, player disposition and aggression

Abstract: As technology advances the need for more comprehensive analyses of the relationship between human aggression and gaming increases. First Person Shooter gaming environments provide realistic opportunities for many interactions between players. Violent and aggressive video games have been blamed for many aggressive acts. Early meta-analyses of gaming and aggression concluded that gaming does increase aggression, although at levels lower than that of television and other media. More recent meta-analyses claim that there is no correlation between gaming and aggression. However, previous studies do not consider the possible effect of a live opponent on player aggression and therefore the current study includes this as a putative factor in gaming and aggression. Results indicate that neither the disposition of the opponent (confederate) nor the aggressive level of the game type affected participant aggression.


8:  Blood and Violence: Exploring the Impact of Gore in Violent Video Games

Violence is a key element in video games and despite the extensive research in video game violence, there is still a debate on its psychophysiological effect. There is a lack of understanding on the elements of video game violence that influence aggression. The present pilot study examines the effect of blood and gore in a first-person shooter with participants playing in one of the two conditions, with or without blood and gore. To assess the effect of blood and gore, and thus violence, a number of elements were measured including physical arousal, individual differences, personality, and game experience. The results suggested that blood and gore had no effect on aggression-related associations and cognitive processes. The findings did suggest that previous game experience had a significant effect on increased physiological arousal when engaging in violent content featuring blood and gore. Furthermore, a personality trend emerged showing an effect on arousal and cognitive processes. As the study was preliminary, definitive conclusions cannot be drawn, however the findings warrant further investigation.


9:  The effects of realistic controller and real-life exposure to gun on psychology of violent video game players

A 2 (gun replica vs. mouse) x 2 (experience in real gun vs. no experience in real gun) between-subjects experiment was conducted to examine the effects of realistic controller and real-life exposure to gun on violent video game players' perceived degree of presence and state of aggression. The present study found that participants who played a violent video game with a gun replica (real gun-like controller) reported a greater level of physical presence and higher state of physical aggression than those who played the game with a conventional mouse did. An analysis of variance demonstrated the effects of physiological desensitization to violence; participants with real gun experience reported a lower state of aggression after playing the game than those without the experience did. The analysis also showed that there was no relationship between real gun experience and presence. Both limitations of the present study and guidelines for future research are discussed.


10:  Violent gaming and player aggression: Exploring the effects of socio-psychological and technology influences

Given the high levels of violence in South Africa, there is widespread concern among the public that video game violence may be increasing the risk of aggression in players and consequently leading to violence. Employing the General Aggression Model (GAM), this study set out to examine the influence of socio-psychological factors such as excessive gaming and pathological gaming, and technology factors such as interactive richness on player aggression. The research model was tested using survey data collected from 101 university students. Regression analysis indicates that only pathological gaming explains a small variance in player aggression. Contrary to prior studies that make strong claims that violent video game playing leads to aggressive behaviour, these factors made only a negligible contribution to predicting player aggression in this study. Future research should focus on testing multiple pathways that culminates into player aggression. Violent gaming technologies may not be influencing aggressive behaviour as much as stimulating pre-aggressive individuals already predisposed by other socio-psychological factors. Future research should test the above factors with more contextual based socio-psychological factors, within the individual aggressor's family and close-knit social environment. Intervention and prevention programs may be better served by insights into the aggressor's personal, family, and social context rather than technology related behaviours.


11:  Higher Graphical Fidelity Decreases Players' Access to Aggressive Concepts in Violent Video Games

Several features of violent video games (hence VVGs) may cause gamers to access aggressive concepts during play. Two of these features are graphical fidelity and use of narrative. In particular, the increased graphical fidelity of modern VVGs is widely theorised to cause increased access to aggressive concepts. However, despite this theoretical speculation, there is little empirical evidence of whether these formal features of VVGs actually do influence players to access aggressive concepts during play. Therefore, a 2x2 between-subjects factorial online experiment (N = 710) was employed. This examined the effects of graphical fidelity and narrative content on the extent to which players accessed aggression-related concepts when playing a VVG. Results indicated that the presence of realistic graphics in a video game representing aggression caused players to access aggressive concepts less (p = 0.014). The presence of narrative content was not found to have a statistically significant effect. Under an influential (though controversial) model of VVG effects known as the General Aggression Model, increased access to aggressive concepts causally contributes to anti-social behaviour by players of VVGs. These findings suggest that even if playing modern VVGs did lead to these negative effects, they would not be influenced by the increased graphical fidelity of modern VVGs.

12:  Role of Internal Health Belief, Catharsis Seeking, and Self-Efficacy in Game Players' Aggression

Abstract:
It is time to pursue a new perspective on players' aggression studies. In this study, we examined whether and how players' aggression is affected by game usage. In contrast to most existing studies, our study asks about crucial underlying factors among the general game population and thereby investigates therapeutic factors (internal health status belief, game and life self-efficacy, and therapeutic catharsis seeking), psychological problems (depression, loneliness), and demographic variables (age, gender). A sample of 918 players was recruited through the Internet and asked to fill out a questionnaire. Results show that players who reported higher levels of internal health status belief, game and life self-efficacy, therapeutic catharsis seeking, depression, and loneliness showed significantly decreased degrees of aggression. By revealing the crucial role of health belief, mood repair, mood management theory, use and gratification theory, as well as aggression catharsis effects as underlying concepts of players' aggression, our results provide a deeper insight into mechanisms of aggression alleviation in game studies.
Published in: System Sciences (HICSS), 2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on
Date of Conference: 5-8 Jan. 2016
Date Added to IEEE Xplore: 10 March 2016
Electronic ISBN: 978-0-7695-5670-3
Print ISSN: 1530-1605
 
INSPEC Accession Number: 15839564
DOI: 10.1109/HICSS.2016.472
Publisher: IEEE
Conference Location: Koloa, HI, USA
